In this video, we're going to see how to
use diffmerge with sort code from this
course. So specifically we're going to
learn how to compare your code against
other code using diffmerge and then as a
result find common errors like typos and
also go through the process of fixing
those, so let's swing over to IntelliJ.
Now I've opened the methods project this
is the one we worked on now fairly
recently, in fact we worked on this we
put the final changes if you recall the
final changes to the methods challenge
and we made fixed another bug and I also
showed you an alternate way to code the
calculated high score position method
and so I've got that project open so
what you'll need to do is download that
and be happy and have that version of
the code available and just to confirm
you got to run this to make sure that it
works you can see that was the output
that we saw previously so that's working
nicely. Now what we're going to do is
introduce an error here so that we can
then compare the code using the diff
merge tool, so what I'm going to do is
put in what is a relatively common error
so get down here to this line here on
line 82 I'm going to put a semicolon
after the right parenthesis, you'll
notice when I do that the code is still
valid and this is something that someone
new to programming may often do because
an if statement doesn't have a semicolon
that's the bottom line there, so by doing
that what we've done is we've actually
change the code and as you can see
there's no compilation errors and we'll
still be able to run this and it's a
small error it's literally only one
character a semicolon and it's hard to
notice if you're not careful enough so
that means that the last else now is
basically an empty statement this is the
one down here so the code for that last
else position equals three on line there
83 so that's going to always execute so
in other words that one simple change
this method will now always return
position three, so just to confirm that
we'll run it and you can see now clearly
we've got a different result we've got
all the results coming back as position 3.
So we've introduced a bug into
the source-code, so what we're going to
do now is get another copy of that
source code that hasn't got the error
and what I've done is I've attached the
source code to this video, so you can use
that and download this source code and
open it up and make this change but then
we need a second copy of the source code
so that we can use up for comparison and
obviously the second copy that we
download shouldn't have the error
because what we're trying to do is
compare the version of the code that
works against the copy that doesn't work.
Now I've already done that I'm not going
to go through the process of unzipping
it because I'm sure you're familiar
enough with zips to do that now
basically you just want to unzip it into
a folder I'm going to show you what I've
done, so we look like now my desktop I've
got the code that we've just made a
change to in this folder and the other
one there's a folder called original so
button zip the files there and that's
the version that doesn't have any errors
and what we're going to do is we're
going to compare the two projects and
I'm going to show you how you can find
errors. Alright, so back to IntelliJ
then we need to start the program that
will install previously called diff
merge, so on a Mac what I can do is I can
just press command space and type in
diffmerge so you'll start that up
on your operating system with Windows or
Linux the way you'd normally start but
I'm starting up diffmerge and you
can see that's now loaded up on the
screen. Now with this tool, we can compare
folders and we can also compare
individual files. Now some projects in
this course as we move forward will
contain multiple files so it's easier to
get into the habit of the comparing
folders, so what we're going to do now
that we've loaded diffmerge is click on
this first icon here and that's the icon
to open a folder window and this will
look very very similar irrespective of
your operating system, so I click on that.
Now what I've got here is I've already
entered the details but you'd normally
click on browse and you'd never get to
the folder that contains the downloaded
copy of the source code from the course,
so in other words if you had a project
that you were working on and you found
that you weren't able to get it to work
how I got it to work in the video, then
you would download the version from the
resources section of whichever video you
want to check and you unzip it and put
it somewhere in my case I've actually put
in a folder called original just so that
I know that that's the original code so
I've selected that with browse and on
the right hand side the right folder
that would be your code in this case
that's the code that we've got in
IntelliJ and we're going to compare the
two, so I can click on browse and select
that again but we can see that we've
actually got two different versions of
the code showing now. Once I do that I
can click ok and you can see what's
happened when I've done that, we've now
got two selected folders and once we
selected those folders, we can see on the
left hand side and the right hand side
we're getting some information about the
fact that things are different here so
the diffmerge tool has compared the
two folders and what it will do by
default it will only show files that are
different, so if you have done something
identical to what I've done then it
won't come up in here at all but in this
case the file that we're looking at we
want to look at is main dot Java because
that's the code that's got the file
rather that's got the code that we want
to check against and we've also got the
IntelliJ dot IDEA folder and I'll show you
later in this video how to remove that
and we've also got these class files
which you wouldn't normally want to
check because if you tried to check
those and I could just do that by double
clicking them, we actually get some weird
messages because it's not actually the
right file type to check so I wouldn't
normally want to check a class file, so
I'm going to show you later how to
remove those but the one that we do want
to check is the Java file and again once
you get into more complex projects as
you move through this course you find
that any other Java program files and
other files will show up here as well so
we want to do here is check our Java
code I'm going to double click now you
can see once I've done that I'm just
going to open this up and make it a bit
bigger we can see now that we've got two
versions of the main Java files showing
on the screen here and notice also that
it's immediately moved down to the line
on line 82 and it's actually saying here
what's actually showing us the original
code and we'll know that this is the
original because up here it's got the
low folder location that says original
you can see that hasn't got a semicolon
after the right parenthesis on line 82
but this one here notice the
semicolon showing in red on the
right-hand side and again clearly that's
a different folder as well, so that's
telling us straight away that there's a
difference between the two files so this
software has automatically figured out
that there's a probable there's a
difference between those two lines so
again on the left-hand side we've got
the code that was downloaded from the
lesson and on the right is the code from
IntelliJ. So diffmerge is showing all the
differences between those two files so
notice these blue vertical lines where
our lines different in this case is only
the one line so lines that have the same
code they don't have those blue vertical
lines and if I clicked on another line
and notice that it's not showing me
anything blue at all but if I come back
there and click on that line it shows
those blue lines again and also it shows
the semicolon that's different in red so
as you can see diffmerge can be very
helpful when you make typing mistakes or
if there's some logical error as the if
statement is at the moment. So let's move
back to IntelliJ and change one more
line I want to show you what
will happen when we do that, so we'll go
back into IntelliJ and what I'm going to
do is we're going to go to the display a
high score position method we're going
to delete this part here this player
name so I'm going to delete that so it
doesn't display the play name and I'm
just going to run it to confirm that we
no longer see the player name and you
can see we haven't got a player
showing there so we've made another
change that's now going to be different
to the other code so let's go back to
diffmerge to see what's happened I'm
selecting diffmerge and notice what
happened that when I went back to diff
merge we've got this little pop-up
window and I'll just center that in size
it up so we can see it, so notice what
it's saying there files changed on disk
the following file files have been
changed by another application, would you
like to reload? So in other words diff
merge noticed that there's been a change
made in this case see the file on the
right hand side because we made that
change within IntelliJ and it's asking
us do we want to reload that file, so
that it can go through the process of
checking again. Now sometimes it won't
always get this right and automatically
detect that so if it doesn't detect it
for you you don't get this message you
can just close down
diffmergeand open it again and it'll find
the file the next time
but in my case you can see it has come
up would you like to reload I'm gonna
click on yes and notice what's happened
now is we've also got an arrow nail
showing up here on line 61 we can see
that player name exists on the left hand
side, however it doesn't exist on the
right hand side, so we've now got two
lines that have differences and then no
generally no on the stiffs they were
called a diff in other words so we can
easily navigate between diffs on the left
hand side this is white bar down here
and what we can actually do is click
these red icons and you'll have a red
icon usually for each line that's
different between the two files so you
can click on one of these lines and
notice that that brings that up on
screen you can select either one to go
up and down two errors and if we click
on that line again we'll see the blue
bars indicating that there's a
difference and if you'll notice
carefully you can't really say that
perhaps too good in the video but the
lines that are different have a slightly
light red background and the parts that
are different they've got this much
heavier red background so you can see
that the diff mode tool is trying to
make it obvious to you where the errors
are and again as I showed you if I click
on the actual line it brings those blue
out blue lines just to make it clear
that that's a line that is that's in
kneading that is different between the
two files now you can also jump between
different lines using the icons in the
toolbar and notice these three icons
that are to the right-hand side of the
toolbar so when I con with the arrow is
pointing to the right then the next one
has the arrow pointing down and the one
after that has got the arrow pointing up
so I can choose either the up or down
one to jump to the previous or to the
next change instead of clicking on those
red icons and come up there and choose
and click down there to go to rid of
them so it's an easy way for you to
navigate you don't have to scroll
yourself manually you would generally
not want to do that you want to specify
and you'd want to click on the red icon
or use this navigation to go to the
specific errors that tell you want to
change alright so now that we've
identified the errors how do we go about
fixing them so what we can do is we can
choose to copy the changes from the left
and window to the right hand window
generally that's what you'd want to do
and that's because we've identified that
the code on the left-hand side is the
original code from the course and that
would generally be the code that is
correct so what we want to do here is we
want to actually copy the code changes
that are different from the original
code back into our source code which
ultimately will go back into IntelliJ
and all we need to do there is once we
select the line we come up over here and
there's an option there and it says
apply change from left, so I click on
that you can see what's happened
automatically we've got the changes now
being applied over here we've got this
black underlined
telling us that there's been a change
that's been made in there and it's also
showing bold as well we've now got plain
I'm showing as it was on the left hand
side and the other thing that if you
look carefully at line 61 and 62 there's
two stars the a or asterixis which is
telling you that there's been a change
made to that line because obviously
that's a continuation line there so you
can see there at a glance that that has
a code that has been changed by the
process we'll be going through here and
we can apply the next change in this
case what we want to do again you get is
go from left to right by coming up here
because we know that we're on that next
line now because that happened after we
fixed the first one to change this time
you can see we've done that and it
actually removed the code that was
incorrect on the right hand side for us
and again we've got the Asterix is
they're indicating that the line has
been modified and we can see the code is
now underlined and in bold once you've
done that at this point in time the code
changes haven't been saved so what we
need to do to save those changes is we
need to come up here and click on the
Save icon this little picture of a
floppy disk and at that point the
changes have now been made and we should
be able to go back into IntelliJ and
notice I went back the players player
name was put back and also down here in
line 82 that semicolons been removed so
I can actually run this code again now
and notice that we've now got the code
working the positions are now working
correctly and also the names have been
returned again so you can see that's
pretty cool
diffmerge will actually help you a lot
in your code in this case in this course
checking to see what changes have been
made you know
what's different between the two files
but yes you become a more experienced
programmer you find you'll be able to
use that in other situations for example
it can give you a quick way to know what
has been changed in this coding session
in other words if you've been working on
some code perhaps for 30 minutes or 60
minutes you can use a diff tool like
this stiff merge and see what has been
changed from when you started coding
very very useful indeed.
Alright, so going back to diffmerge in
I'm going to close down this file change
the outcomes we've established that
that's okay and notice now that well if
I go back through now, new file reload
notice what happened when I did that
some other files are disappeared so
what's happened now is those other parts
of a move that had been removed from the
display because they're effectively
identical because we've now confirmed
that both sides the left and right that
both versions of the files have now been
updated to the same thing but if you
recall at the start of the video we had
those dot class files showing and they
were in a file type that we wanted to
wherever check on I'm going to show you
how to go about changing that now if
you're on a Windows platform you need to
go to the tools option menu to do this
options and I think that's the same for
Linux but on a Mac I'm going to go up to
the top left hand corner differ and
preferences and what we want to do is
come down here into folder fuels as you
can see so another folder windows menu
now what we want to do is set this up to
ignore some common file types that we
won't be never needing to compare now a
class file is a compiled version of a
Java source file so that's not something
we'd ever want to check so what we can
do is we can come out under here under
using file name filters making sure the
check box is on which it is by default
and can put a space and put star dot
class so that actually tells diff emerge
and ever check differences between files
of top class start up these all files
than any in class but the other thing we
can also do here is come down here to
file filters and these are sub folders
and you may find that there's a number
of sub folders that you don't want to
ever check against and you can add them
here and you can come back and do this
at any time,
so in our case if you can see on the
left hand side there we've got a dot
idea folder and that's the IntelliJ is
folder that it uses to track changes to
code so we wouldn't usually everyone
have a need to check whether those files
are the same or different so
consequently and the boulder filters
making sure that check box is on for you
subfolder filters I'm gonna put a space
and the name of the folder dot ID if you
had any other folders you could do the
similar thing to that as well then if
you click ok to that notice how the dot
idea forward I disappeared and if your
diff merge was showing class files you'd
see that they would have been removed as
well. Alright so that's basically it,
that's what I wanted to do to show you
this diff emerge tool I think it's a
really useful tool to use so if you are
getting stuck in front of your codes not
working compared to the code that I've
written in a particular video, go through
the steps that I've outlined in this
video and to help you find where the
actual error is, diffmerge is a very
useful tool as you can hopefully see now
and it can be very helpful when you've
got to compare folders as I mentioned
and also you can actually use it to
check individual files if you don't want
to go through and check out at folder
level, but I think it's a good habit to
get into to check by folder and that's
so that when you start checking against
larger projects it's automatically set
up for you to check all the Java code or
any other type of file that you specify
and not just an individual file, so use
it again if you're typing code from one
of the videos in this course and you
found that you can't get it to work or
it's not working the same doing it that
way you can quickly spot what the
differences in the code are then you can
even get diff merge to make the changes
for you if you want to do that as well,
so it's a great comparison tool.
Alright, so at this point now I'm going to finish
the video,
I hope you've got a lot out of it and
I'll see you in the next one.